Quick and Dirty GSL Archive Documentation
-----------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Introduction
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This text file explains the format of GSL archive files, as used in the Phantasy
Star Online series of games. This format remained relatively unchanged from the
first Phantasy Star Online game on the Dreamcast through Phantasy Star Online
Blue Burst (with the exception of a big-endian version used on the Gamecube
version of the game).

The GSL archive file format is a bit of an improvement over the AFS archive
for some files on the Dreamcast version of PSO, but still isn't really all that
great of an archive file format. Unlike AFS, GSL archives do store the names of
the files that are contained in the archive. The file table at the beginning of
the archive is of variable length, but doesn't store the number of files
contained within the archive (although, the end of the table can be either
detected by blank entries or the beginning of file data). There is no magic
number at the beginning of the file to identify the archive as a GSL archive.
Files are still padded to 2KiB boundaries, which is enforced by fact that
offsets within the archive are notated in 2KiB chunks in the file table.

Now that the intro is out of the way, onto the file format...

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 File Format
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All multi-byte numeric types used in a GSL archive dependent on what version of
the game the archive was created for. Archives created for Gamecube versions of
the game store multi-byte numeric types in Big Endian (PowerPC) byte order,
whereas those made for PSO Blue Burst, PSO for Windows, or the Dreamcast
versions of PSO are in Little Endian (Intel) byte order. This only applies to
the archive container file itself -- individual files may differ in their byte
ordering.

All GSL archives consist of a file table, and the individual files that are
stored in the archive. There is no global file header as there is in an AFS
archive. Files are stored after the file table, one after the other, padded to
2KiB boundaries.

File Table (variable length):
Each entry in the file table is 48 bytes long and is of the following format:
    32 bytes - File Name
        Stored as plain ASCII characters
    4 bytes - Offset within the archive, in 2KiB blocks
    4 bytes - Length of the file, in bytes
    8 bytes - Unused? Always zeroes.

It is unknown if there must be a blank entry at the end of the file table for
use with the games themselves, however this tool does require a blank entry at
the end of the file table, currently. In addition, like the files themselves,
this area must be padded to a 2KiB boundary. Sega's files always seem to have
space for some power-of-two number of entries (with a minimum of 256 entries).

Archived Files (variable length):
Each file follows at the positions specified in the file table above. Files are
padded to 2KiB boundaries, as is required by the offset values in the file table
section above.
